According to a BBC story published Feb. 4, the last living speaker of an ancient Indian language recently passed away, taking with her the legacy of the Bor dialect. According to linguist K. David Harrison, nearly half of the worlds 7,000 languages are close to extinction. As part of a project called Enduring Voices, Harrison is looking at language preservation and whether its important to maintain dying mother tongues.
Statistics Canada estimates that in Canada alone, there are close to 50 indigenous languages spoken across the country. Linguistic experts fear that only a handful of these, including Cree and Ojibwa, will survive the next generation. However, communities are struggling to hold on to some of these and in British Columbia two First Nations communities have created language nests to teach children their heritage languages. 
Studies have shown that the second generation of immigrants in North America often lose their mother tongues through lack of use and assimilation. 
Do you feel its important to hold on to traditional dialects and languages? 
Have you worked to preserve a language in your family or community? Share your story.
 
 
 
saskatchewan native dialects endangered: this is the foundation of our culture
September 12, 2010
 
Aboriginal language experts say several native dialects are endangered in Saskatchewan as fewer young people learn their ancestral tongues.
There are eight aboriginal languages spoken the province. The most widely spoken are Cree and Saulteaux.
Statistics Canada says one in five aboriginal children under the age of five can understand an aboriginal language.
But native language experts in Saskatchewan say this figure is suspect, and some languages such as Nakota, Lakota and Dakota are in danger of extinction.
Dorothy Myo, president of the Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre, said there are only a handful of people who speak some native dialects  and those speakers are aging.
The youngest fluent speakers are between the age of 26 to 65, said Myo. Our youngest people aren't learning the language. They're not having access to learning their language today.
Myo said preserving aboriginal languages has become a priority for native leaders, who are expected to press the provincial government to allow more aboriginal language instruction in schools.
There are so few speakers, and its really on the verge of extinction. Part of that strategy is the youth  first to have them take an interest and then have it accessible for them to learn.
Frances Anaquod, who teaches Saulteaux at her home community of Muscowpetung, said at one time the Saulteaux-language program was dropped in the local school, but then politicians realized it was too important to lose and reinstated it.
Its very important at this point in time to be trying to revitalize our languages, said Anaquod. The children love it. This is the foundation of our culture.
 
 
 
 
 
 
once-vibrant aboriginal languages struggle for survival: some language rescue efforts paying off in first nations communities
October 24, 2012

In a way, the chattering half-dozen First Nations youngsters are learning their mother tongue for the first time  and the future of the once-mighty Mohawk language is hanging in the balance.
The students are a critical component of a language-revitalization program at the Tsi Tyonnheht Onkwawenna Language and Cultural Centre in Tyendinaga First Nation that hopes to breathe new life into the communitys original identity, one small voice at a time.
We are quite a success story: weve built enough capacity in our programs that we are able to teach our own now, says Callie Hill, the cultural centres director.
We were at a point where we had to call in teachers from other Mohawk communities because we didn't have anyone who could speak our language.
The program in this community east of Belleville, Ont., is a point of light in a national landscape once vibrant with the sound of more than 70 distinct First Nations languages.
Now, of the more than 60 across the country that were registered in the 2011 census, only a relative handful  such as Cree, Ojibway, Oji-Cree and Dene  remain strong and viable, the latest numbers from Statistics Canada suggest.
The Cree languages, Ojibway and Inuktitut were the three most common of the 60 aboriginal languages reported in the 2011 census, representing nearly two-thirds of the 213,490 people who claimed one as their mother tongue, the agency reported Wednesday.
Thats down by about 3,620 people, or 1.7 per cent, since 2006, Statistics Canada said.
People with the Cree languages as their mother tongue lived mainly in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta and Quebec, while those with Ojibway or Oji-Cree mother tongues were mainly in Ontario or Manitoba.
 
Language a mainstay of culture
Mohawk is among many aboriginal tongues in Canada that are hanging by a thread  in large part victims of the sordid legacy of Canadas residential school system. Many will likely die with the few remaining elders who speak them.   
Edward Doolittle, head of interdepartmental programs at First Nations University of Canada in Regina, calls it an enormous loss.   
We don't even know what were losing, Doolittle says. Once weve lost language, weve lost a mainstay of culture. All the knowledge that has gone into our languages and our cultures may be needed again sometime  and may be needed sometime soon.   
According to the 2011 census, the Cree languages are showing relative strength, with some 83,475 people claiming them as their mother tongue. Inuktitut was reported by some 34,110 people, while 19,275 people reported Ojibway and 11,860 reported Dene.   
 
B.C. languages extremely endangered 
For many others, fluent speakers are measured in the hundreds, dozens, or even single digits. Mohawk, an Iroquois tongue long associated with one of the most iconic representations of First Nations identity, registered a paltry 545 people, all of them in Ontario and Quebec.
The situation is bleakest, however, in British Columbia, which is home to more than half of Canadas native languages. All are in danger of disappearing, with only about one in 20 aboriginals in the province still fluent  almost all of them elders.   
Many of the small languages are really extremely endangered, says Olga Lovick, an associate linguistics professor at First Nations University.
Once it stops being spoken a lot in the community, theres so little really one can do.   
The last 20 years, however, have seen a push to arrest the demise and even turn it around, such as in Tyendinaga. Numerous websites now offer basic lessons along with words and pronunciations. Universities offer degree courses. There are community programs.   
In some cases, a younger person apprentices with a fluent elder in a last-ditch effort to keep the language alive. Sometimes, older people finally give in to a long-held wish.   
I always wanted to learn my language, says Margaret Claus, 76, as she struggles with Mohawk at the adult program in Tyendinaga. Its part of my heritage.  
Keren Rice, professor of linguistics at the University of Toronto, calls the efforts heartening.   
People are understanding that if something isnt done now, its not going to be possible to do it, Rice says.   
While about one-quarter of First Nations people report having an aboriginal mother tongue, a higher proportion report being able to speak a native language, as was the case in 2006.   
The figures suggest second-language programs such as those in Tyendinaga are having an impact.   
For linguists, the gold standard is whether language is passed on from one generation to the next in the home, something that's not happening in many First Nations families.   
Experts cite several reasons for why many aboriginals seem reluctant to learn and teach their own tongue. One is the lack of economic payback, although some program graduates go on to earn money as teachers.   
Another problem, experts say, is the internalization of centuries of racist attitudes  that indigenous language and culture is inferior.   
They somehow want to free themselves of their language so they can become more authentically Canadian, says Darin Flynn, assistant professor in the department of linguistics at the University of Calgary.   
Experts say offering First Nations languages in schools and the small but growing number of university courses provide formal recognition of their value.   
First Nations University  which has one of the most extensive such programs in Canada  offers major degrees in Cree and Saulteaux, and minors in Dene, Nakota and Dakota.
The school is also pushing faculty and administrators to gain facility in Cree.
Still, experts worry the various programs wont be enough to win the daunting battle to preserve or enhance fluency, given the pervasive absence of the indigenous languages in First Nation homes, media and governments.
Among Canadian jurisdictions, only the Northwest Territories officially recognizes aboriginal languages  Chipewyan, Cree, Gwichin, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey, Tlicho  in addition to English and French.
But even in the Northwest Territories, more people name the Philippines-based language of Tagalog  the fastest growing non-official language in Canada, according to the 2011 data  as their mother tongue than list three or four of the official native languages.
Back in Tyendinaga, Hill agrees there are those who see little point in learning their indigenous tongue.
At the same time, she says, a few parents are trying to raise their children in Mohawk, and Mohawk is now spoken by about 50 people in the community of 2,200.
For the first time in ages, the Mohawks of Tyendinaga can do their own longhouse ceremonies without outside speakers.
Everything that we are is in our language, Hill said. It is the base of who we are.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facebook flags aboriginal names as not authentic
February 25, 2015
 
Facebook requires its users to use a profile name thats the same as the name they use in real life, but some indigenous people say the social network is rejecting their real names because they dont conform to its standards.
Earlier this month, Dana Lone Hill, a member of the Lakota people living on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, tried to log in to her Facebook account. She was met with an error message asking her to change her name.
The message read: It looks like the name on your Facebook account may not be your authentic name. 
Lone Hills name is one she shares with her mother. Facebook required her to send in three pieces of identification to prove that her real name is real. Eventually, the social network reactivated her account. 
Lone Hill wrote about her experience on the Last Real Indians blog, and she found she wasnt the only aboriginal person to who had run afoul of Facebooks real name policy. 
In October, a number of people  with names like Lance Browneyes and Shane Creepingbear  had had their accounts suspended because of their names. 
And so did Kimberly TallBear, a professor of anthropology at the University of Texas at Austin and a member of the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate. 
I just tried to log in one day and they said you cant log in and your account has been suspended, she said. It just kind of came out of the blue. Id been on Facebook since 2009.
When TallBear emailed Facebook, they asked her to send in I.D. to confirm her name and the spelling, but they werent satisfied with that, either. 
They didnt like the unusual capitalization, said TallBear, whose name appears as one word with a capital B on government issued identification. 
I grew up in South Dakota. Im used to names like this. But apparently most Americans arent, and even when faced with identification that shows that thats our legal name, still cant wrap their minds around it, she said. 
Unusual capitalization is one of the no-nos listed on Facebooks page on what names are allowed on the social network, along with symbols, numbers, repeating characters and punctuation. Of course, a capital letter in the middle of a name isnt so unusual if your name happens to be Scottish. 
This isnt the first time the social network has stirred up controversy with their standards around so-called real names.
Last fall, Facebook issued an apology to drag queens, transgender people and members of the LGBT community. Facebook had suspended the accounts of performers in San Francisco for use of their stage names. 
The companys chief product officer, Chris Cox, wrote that Facebooks policy has never been to require everyone on Facebook to use their legal name. The spirit of our policy is that everyone on Facebook uses the authentic name they use in real life. 
So, for drag queen Lil Miss Hot Mess, that real-life authentic name is Lil Miss Hot Mess.
But even after that apology and clarification, aboriginal users continued to have their profiles locked.
Professor TallBear had her account reactivated and started writing about her experience. She found that the issue isnt new.
I have friends all over Indian country, in the United States and Canada, she said. There have been people in Pine Ridge and other places who had had their Facebook accounts suspended over the last several years.
TallBear says there are specific reasons that Facebook would flag aboriginal names as suspect. One of them, she says, is that the conversation about race in America generally doesnt include indigenous people
Theres this national narrative in the United States that were all dead and gone, said TallBear.
And she says Facebooks reaction is part of a larger issue about aboriginal identity. 
Eliminating our Facebook accounts because you cant wrap your mind around the fact that TallBear or Creepingbear or Lone Hill or any of these other names are real names, legal names, its related to the disappearance of Native Americans through the support of the Redskins and other kinds of mascots, she said.  
People get away with that kind of behaviour because there is this explicit or subconscious idea that Native Americans are no longer part of the American public, said TallBear. 
TallBear isnt accusing Facebook of specifically targeting aboriginals, though. 
It speaks to a lack of diversity at Facebook themselves. Theyve done this to many, many native people, she said. I realize that this isnt an intentional disenfranchisement, but it speaks to a broader problem of what is considered normal.
And whats considered normal, says TallBear, is names that sound European. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first nations languages explored in global study on mother tongues: dene, east cree and inuktitut among 10 languages involved in the project
April 12, 2015
 
Three indigenous languages still spoken in Canada are among a group being studied as researchers attempt to understand how children around the world learn their vastly different mother tongues.
The global project  spearheaded by the University of Zurich  is looking at Dene, East Cree, and Inuktitut among 10 languages.
Researchers already know that children have little problem learning to speak their native language. Whats not well understood is exactly how this happens.
Were trying to get a real sense of how children can acquire or learn any language in the world, Dagmar Jung, a senior researcher from the University of Zurich, said in an interview.
It's a miracle that any child can actually learn any language its exposed to when its young.
 
First Nations University of Canada
As part of the study, Jung and Olga Lovick, an associate linguistics professor at the First Nations University of Canada, were heading to the Clearwater River Dene Nation in northern Saskatchewan on Sunday.
Its one of only three places in the world where children grow up speaking Dene.
About 7,000 languages are spoken around the world but most research to date has focused on the structurally similar large European languages.
The question is how do kids go about learning a language that is structurally so different as Dene? Jung said from Regina.
Jung, who plans an initial two-month stay with the Clearwater River Dene, and Lovick plan to train community members to record children of two or three years old and to write down what they say over the next year.
Lovick will help co-ordinate the research, which will involve Dene language experts, research and recording assistants, as well as participating families.
 
Keeping endangered languages alive
At one point, Canada was home to more than 70 distinct First Nations languages. Recent figures suggest about a dozen have disappeared altogether and the others  with few exceptions  are extremely endangered.
By our being there and fostering this interest in children learning the language, were hoping that maybe this will remind people how important it is to speak Dene to their kids so that they keep learning Dene, Lovick said. In many other places its too late.
One aim of the research is to identify ways to teach First Nations languages more effectively to adults.
We know how hard they are to learn as adults, Jung said. So everybody is actually really excited to see finally how children do it because we just don't know how to do it easily.
One idea  currently being challenged  is that childrens brains have a hard-wired grammar module called Universal Grammar from which all human languages can be derived.
Another idea is that learning a language relies on general cognitive mechanisms.
Much of the initial research on Inuktitut and East Cree is already underway or been done.
The other languages in the study are Turkish, Japanese, Russian, Sesotho, which is spoken in southern Africa, Yucatec Maya in Mexico, Chintang in Nepal, and Indonesian.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
do first nations have a right to indigenous language schools?
July 08, 2015
 
In Canada, people have a right to publicly-funded education in either of our official languages, French and English. Now, some people want that right extended to First Nations languages, like Cree, Ojibwa, and Dene.
As guaranteed by the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, children of Francophones living outside Quebec, where numbers warrant, are entitled to a French-language education.
David Leitch is a Toronto lawyer, and is part of the executive of the Aboriginal Section of the Ontario Bar Association. Lorena Fontaine is an Assistant Professor of Indigenous Studies at the University of Winnipeg.
They both believe the constitution of Canada guarantees First Nations the right to funding for education for indigenous language schools.
Fontaines parents and grandparents were fluent in Cree and Ojibwa, but were punished for speaking their language in residential school. As a result, she never learned to speak the languages, and cant pass them along to her children. Fontaine believes that guaranteeing a right to education in a First Nations language would be part of the reconciliation process. 
 
There was an attempt by the government to destroy the languages. After I had my daughter I realized it was very evident in her life, because I have no where to teach the language. I have no place to send her to learn Ojibwa or Cree, our ancestral languages.  Lorena Fontaine, Assistant Professor of Indigenous Studies at the University of Winnipeg
 
Leitch argues that another section of the Constitution, Section 35, which guarantees aboriginal treaty rights and land claims, also guarantees a right to keep cultural ties like language alive. Therefore, the government has an obligation to provide First Nations language schooling, similar to French-language schooling outside of Quebec. To him, its an issue of equality. 
 
I want peace in my own country. I dont want to feel like 350 years later, the people who were here first, their languages, their culture, their traditions are trampled upon.  David Leitch, Lawyer
 
Leitch is optimistic that one day, hell mount a constitutional challenge against the government, arguing they have a duty to provide First Nations language schooling.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first nations chief from b.c. calls for urgent effort to save indigenous languages: john edwards says extinction of indigenous languages is going unnoticed
January 25, 2016 
 
A First Nations chief from British Columbia is calling for urgent efforts to revive indigenous languages, saying their extinction is going unnoticed while the world focuses on the preservation of cultural heritage sites.
Edward John, a member of the U.N. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, told a news conference that ancient wonders are important but indigenous languages are the essential component of cultural heritage and should get international attention and support to ensure their survival.
John spoke Thursday at the end of a three-day meeting of indigenous language experts at U.N. headquarters on revitalizing many of the estimated 6,000 to 7,000 languages spoken by [indigenous] peoples around the world.
The priority focus that I hear from all of the experts is, create fluent speakers, he said. Thats what you need to do. How do you do it? Thats the discussion taking place.
There's been a large focus on literacy, developing books and calendars and dictionaries in indigenous languages, John said, but not as much of an effort in fluency.
John pointed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moons address in May 2011 to the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues where he said: Today, one indigenous language dies every two weeks. Indigenous cultures are threatened with extinction.
Whats needed urgently is a commitment from every government to identify the indigenous languages in their country and the number and age of speakers so that a global map of where they are can be drawn up for the first time, he said. Then, the focus must be on revitalizing those with fewer speakers and finding the resources to keep languages from becoming extinct.
We know there are some languages where there are less than a handful of speakers left, and when theyre gone that language is gone and everything  everything about that culture and that heritage is gone as well, John said.
Tatjana Degai, an ethnic Itelman from Kamchatka on Russias Pacific coast, said her peoples language is severely endangered.
There are only five elderly speakers left, all of them female speakers, about 70 years old, she said. There are about 10 to 15 middle-aged speakers who grew up hearing the language but dont consider themselves speakers.
Degai, who is trying to help keep the language alive, said Itelman is taught in only one school, and for just 40 minutes a week.
We appreciate that Russia is developing legislation in relation to indigenous language but we also think that it is not enough for our language to survive, she said.
Degai said Itelman is not the only language in trouble  40 of the 47 recognized indigenous peoples in Russia are from the north, Siberia and the Far East, and most of their languages are at the brink of extinction.
Amy Kalili, a native Hawaiin who heads an education organization promoting fluency in the Hawaiian language, said that in middle of the last century there were perhaps 30 speakers under the age of 18. But she said there was a cultural renaissance in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and now schools are educating 3,000 students a year in Hawaiian.
People are passionate about not letting language die, Kalili said, and not just in Hawaii.
She said the Maoris in New Zealand not only get education in their own language but they have government-funded Maori language radio and television channels.
John, who is grand chief of the Tlazten Nation in British Columbia, said he attended an Indian residential school and was banned from speaking Dene, a language also spoken in Alaska and the northwestern and southwestern United States by Native Americans.
He said smart phones and technology should become tools to help reach young people today their indigenous languages.
Google sent an expert to this weeks meeting, he said, and we will reach out to all willing partners to help us in this gigantic effort of revitalization.
John said recommendations from this weeks meeting will be presented to the Permanent Forum meeting in May, and then to the U.N. Economic and Social Council in July.
 

